In mathematics and computer science, dynamic programming is a method of solving problems that exhibit the properties of overlapping subproblems and optimal substructure (described below). The method takes much less time than naive methods.
The term was originally used in the 1940s by Richard Bellman to describe the process of solving problems where one needs to find the best decisions one after another. By 1953, he had refined this to the modern meaning. The field was founded as a systems analysis and engineering topic that is recognized by the IEEE. Bellman's contribution is remembered in the name of the Bellman equation, a central result of dynamic programming which restates an optimization problem in recursive form.
The word "programming" in "dynamic programming" has no particular connection to computer programming at all, and instead comes from the term "mathematical programming", a synonym for optimization. Thus, the "program" is the optimal plan for action that is produced. For instance, a finalized schedule of events at an exhibition is sometimes called a program. Programming, in this sense, means finding an acceptable plan of action, an algorithm.
Optimal substructure means that optimal solutions of subproblems can be used to find the optimal solutions of the overall problem. For example, the shortest path to a goal from a vertex in a graph can be found by first computing the shortest path to the goal from all adjacent vertices, and then using this to pick the best overall path, as shown in Figure 1. In general, we can solve a problem with optimal substructure using a three-step process:
   1. Break the problem into smaller subproblems.
   2. Solve these problems optimally using this three-step process recursively.
   3. Use these optimal solutions to construct an optimal solution for the original problem.
The subproblems are, themselves, solved by dividing them into sub-subproblems, and so on, until we reach some simple case that is solvable in constant time.
Figure 2. The subproblem graph for the Fibonacci sequence. That it is not a tree but a DAG indicates overlapping subproblems.
To say that a problem has overlapping subproblems is to say that the same subproblems are used to solve many different larger problems. For example, in the Fibonacci sequence, F3 = F1 + F2 and F4 = F2 + F3 — computing each number involves computing F2. Because both F3 and F4 are needed to compute F5, a naive approach to computing F5 may end up computing F2 twice or more. This applies whenever overlapping subproblems are present: a naive approach may waste time recomputing optimal solutions to subproblems it has already solved.
In order to avoid this, we instead save the solutions to problems we have already solved. Then, if we need to solve the same problem later, we can retrieve and reuse our already-computed solution. This approach is called memoization (not memorization, although this term also fits). If we are sure we won't need a particular solution anymore, we can throw it away to save space. In some cases, we can even compute the solutions to subproblems we know that we'll need in advance.
